When Leonard Cohen was twenty-five, he was living in London, sitting in cold rooms writing sad poems. He got by on a three-thousand-dollar grant from the Canada Council for the Arts.,With the chill barely out of his bones, Cohen took in the horseshoe-shaped harbor and the people drinking cold glasses of retsina and eating grilled fish in the cafés by the water; he looked up at the pines and the cypress trees and the whitewashed houses that crept up the hillsides.  Not long afterward, he alighted in Athens, visited the Acropolis, made his way to the port of Piraeus, boarded a ferry, and disembarked at the island of Hydra.,He collected a few paraffin lamps and some used furniture: a Russian wrought-iron bed, a writing table, chairs like "the chairs that van Gogh painted." During the day, he worked on a sexy, phantasmagoric novel called "The Favorite Game" and the poems in a collection titled "Flowers for Hitler." He alternated between extreme discipline and the varieties of abandon.,Her grandmother used to tell her, "You are going to meet a man who speaks with a tongue of gold." She thought she already had: Axel Jensen, a novelist from home, who wrote in the tradition of Jack Kerouac and William Burroughs.  Jensen was not a constant husband, however, and, by the time their child was four months old, Jensen was, as Marianne put it, "over the hills again" with another woman.,"I was standing in the shop with my basket waiting to pick up bottled water and milk," she recalled decades later, on a Norwegian radio program.,As a young man, he had a kind of Michael Corleone Before the Fall look, sloe-eyed, dark, a little hunched, but high courtesy and verbal fluency were his charm.  Nico spurned him, and Joni Mitchell, who had once been his lover, remained a friend but dismissed him as a "boudoir poet." But these were the exceptions.,Once, when they were apart—Marianne and Axel in Norway, Cohen in Montreal scraping up some money—he sent her a telegram: "Have house all I need is my woman and her son.,A memorable photograph of her, dressed only in a towel, and sitting at the desk in the house on Hydra, appeared on the back of Cohen’s second album, "Songs from a Room." But, after they’d been together for eight years, the relationship came apart, little by little—"like falling ashes," as Cohen put it.,But life had its burdens, particularly for Axel, who has had persistent health problems. What Cohen’s fans knew of Marianne was her beauty and what it had inspired: "Bird on the Wire," "Hey, That’s No Way to Say Goodbye," and, most of all, "So Long, Marianne." She and Cohen stayed in touch.,In their last communication, Marianne had told Cohen that she had sold her beach house to help insure that Axel would be taken care of, but she never mentioned that she was sick.,Cohen has an album coming out in October—obsessed with mortality, God-infused, yet funny, called "You Want It Darker"—but friends and musical associates say they’d be surprised to see him onstage again except in a limited way: a single performance, perhaps, or a short residency at one venue.,They were both living near the top of the mountain: Bob in a cabin where he wrote about Frost and Melville and drove down the road to teach his classes at Claremont McKenna College; Cohen in a small Zen Buddhist monastery, where he was an ordained monk.  As Faggen was shopping for cold cuts, he heard a familiar basso voice across the store; he looked down the aisle and saw a small, trim man, his head shaved, talking intently with a clerk about varieties of potato salad.,And then, like my mother, he offered what could only have been the complete catalogue of his larder: water, juice, wine, a piece of chicken, a slice of cake, "maybe something else." In the hours we spent together, he offered many refreshments, and, always, kindly.,Marianne’s death was only a few weeks in the past, and Cohen was still amazed at the way his letter—an e-mail to a dying friend—had gone viral, at least in the Cohen-ardent universe.  He hadn’t set out to be public about his feelings, but when one of Marianne’s closest friends, in Oslo, asked to release the note, he didn’t object.,Working with an old collaborator, Pat Leonard, and his son, Adam, who has the producer’s credit, Cohen did much of his work for "You Want It Darker" in the living room, e-mailing recorded files to his partners for additional refinements.  In the small, spare living room where we sat, there were a couple of acoustic guitars leaning against the wall, a keyboard synthesizer, two laptops, a sophisticated microphone for voice recording.,"In a certain sense, this particular predicament is filled with many fewer distractions than other times in my life and actually enables me to work with a little more concentration and continuity than when I had duties of making a living, being a husband, being a father," he said.,I have many resources, some cultivated on a personal level, but circumstantial, too: my daughter and her children live downstairs, and my son lives two blocks down the street.  . At a certain point, if you still have your marbles and are not faced with serious financial challenges, you have a chance to put your house in order.,She was loving, depressive, "Chekhovian" in her emotional range, according to Leonard: "She laughed and wept deeply." Masha’s father, Solomon Klonitzki-Kline, was a distinguished Talmudic scholar from Lithuania who completed a "Lexicon of Hebrew Homonyms." Leonard went to fine schools, including McGill and, for a while, Columbia.  His grandfather, Cohen told me, "was probably the most significant Jew in Canada," the founder of a range of Jewish institutions; in the wake of anti-Semitic pogroms in the Russian imperium, he saw to it that countless refugees made it to Canada.,I don’t know why I did this, I can’t even own it now, but I cut one of the wings of the bow tie off and I wrote something on a piece of paper—I think it was some kind of farewell to my father—and I buried it in a little hole in the back yard.,But, as he wrote in a journal, he always imagined himself as a writer, "raincoated, battered hat pulled low above intense eyes, a history of injustice in his heart, a face too noble for revenge, walking the night along some wet boulevard, followed by the sympathy of countless audiences .  Cuthbert & Company, pouring metal for sinks and piping, and at the clothing factory, where he picked up a useful skill for his career as a touring musician: he learned to fold suits so they didn’t wrinkle.,Cohen, who published his first poem, "Satan in Westmount," when he was nineteen, once said of Layton, "I taught him how to dress, he taught me how to live forever." Cohen has never stopped writing verse; the poem "Steer Your Way" was published in this magazine in June.,As a kid, he had learned the songs in the old lefty folk compendium "The People’s Song Book," listened to Hank Williams and other country singers on the radio, and, at sixteen, dressed in his father’s old suède jacket, he played in a country-music combo called the Buckskin Boys.,A few months after his audition, Cohen put on a suit and went to the Columbia recording studios in midtown to begin work on his first album.,Dylan was especially interested in "Hallelujah." Even before three hundred other performers made "Hallelujah" famous with their cover versions, long before the song was included on the soundtrack for "Shrek" and as a staple on "American Idol," Dylan recognized the beauty of its marriage of the sacred and the profane.,As I approach the end of my life, I have even less and less interest in examining what have got to be very superficial evaluations or opinions about the significance of one’s life or one’s work.,Although Cohen was steeped more in the country tradition, he was swept up when he heard Dylan’s "Bringing It All Back Home" and "Highway 61 Revisited." One afternoon, years later, when the two had become friendly, Dylan called him in Los Angeles and said he wanted to show him a piece of property he’d bought.,Even the simplest song, like ‘The Law,’ which is structured on two fundamental chords, has counterpoint lines that are essential, and anybody who even thinks about doing this song and loves the lyrics would have to build around the counterpoint lines.," ‘Going Home,’ ‘Show Me the Place,’ ‘The Darkness.’ These are all great songs, deep and truthful as ever and multidimensional, surprisingly melodic, and they make you think and feel.,The idea was that he would make his stage début by singing "Suzanne," an early song of his that Collins had turned into a hit after he sang it to her on the telephone.,As Collins writes in her memoir, she finally cajoled him into it, but that night, from the wings, she could see that Cohen, "his legs shaking inside his trousers," was in trouble.,Although he has had many successful performance strategies—wry self-abnegation, drugs, drink—the act of giving concerts often made him feel like "some parrot chained to his stand." He is also a perfectionist; a classic like "Famous Blue Raincoat" still feels "unfinished" to him.,"It says in the Kabbalah that if you can’t get off the ground you should stay on the ground! No, it says in the Kabbalah that, unless Adam and Eve face each other, God does not sit on his throne, and somehow the male and female parts of me refuse to encounter one another tonight—and God does not sit on his throne.,And then it turned into something in retrospect quite comic: the entire audience turned into one Jew! And this Jew was saying, ‘What else can you show me, kid? I’ve seen a lot of things, and this don’t move the dial!’ And this was the entire skeptical side of our tradition, not just writ large but manifested as an actual gigantic being! Judging me hardly begins to describe the operation.  It was a sense of invalidation and irrelevance that I felt was authentic, because those feelings have always circulated around my psyche: Where do you get to stand up and speak? For what and whom? And how deep is your experience? How significant is anything you have to say? .,In the early eighties, when he presented his record company with "Various Positions"—a magnificent album that included "Hallelujah," "Dance Me to the End of Love," and "If It Be Your Will"—Walter Yetnikoff, the head of CBS Records, argued with him about the mix.,Dylan took you to the far ends of the expanding universe, eight minutes of ‘one hand waving free,’ and I loved that, but it didn’t sound like anything I did or was likely to do—it wasn’t very earthly.,When I tried to drink it when there wasn’t a performance coming, it meant nothing! I might as well have been drinking Wild Duck or whatever they call it.,In the sense of being a husband and having more children and the rest." De Mornay, who remains friends with Cohen, told the biographer Sylvie Simmons that he was "having all these relationships with women and not really committing .,In the late sixties, when he was living in New York, he studied briefly at a Scientology center and emerged with a certificate that declared him "Grade IV Release." In recent years, he spent many Shabbat mornings and Monday evenings at Ohr HaTorah, a synagogue on Venice Boulevard, talking about Kabbalistic texts with the rabbi there, Mordecai Finley.  Sometimes, on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, Finley, who says that he considers Cohen "a great liturgical writer," read from the pulpit passages from "Book of Mercy," a 1984 collection of Cohen’s that is steeped in the Psalms. "I participated in all these investigations that engaged the imagination of my generation at that time," Cohen has said.,Cohen is also very much at home in the spiritual reaches of the Internet, and he listens to the lectures of Yakov Leib HaKohain, a Kabbalist who has converted, serially, to Islam, Catholicism, and Hinduism, and lives in the San Bernardino mountains with two pit bulls and four cats. In our conversations, he mentioned the Gnostic Gospels, Lurianic Kabbalah, books of Hindu philosophy, Carl Jung’s "Answer to Job," and Gershom Scholem’s biography of Sabbatai Sevi, a self-proclaimed Messiah of the seventeenth century.,Through his translators, though, he adapted traditional Japanese koans for his American students: "How do you realize Buddha nature while driving a car?" Roshi was short, stout, a drinker of sake and expensive Scotch.  Roshi, who died two years ago at the age of a hundred and seven, arrived in Los Angeles in 1962 but never quite learned the language of his adoptive home.,If he, or anyone else, nodded off during meditation or lost the proper position, one of the monks would come by and rap him smartly on the shoulder with a wooden stick.,He was never charged with any crime, but some former students, writing in Internet chat rooms and in letters to Roshi himself, said that he had sexually groped or coerced many Buddhist students and nuns.  An independent Buddhist panel determined that the behavior had been going on since the seventies, and that those "who chose to speak out were silenced, exiled, ridiculed, or otherwise punished," according to the Times.,"Moving into some periods, which were debilitating, when I found it hard to get off the couch, to periods when I was fully operative but the background noise of anguish still prevailed." Cohen tried antidepressants.,He took a room in a modest hotel and went to daily satsangs, spiritual discussions, at the apartment of Ramesh Balsekar, a former president of the Bank of India and a teacher of Advaita Vedanta, a Hindu discipline.,Cohen spent nearly a year in Mumbai, calling on Balsekar in the mornings, and spending the rest of the day swimming, writing, and wandering the city.,Before he left on his spiritual adventures, Cohen had ceded nearly absolute control of his financial affairs to Kelley Lynch, his business manager for seventeen years and, at one time, briefly, his lover.,In Los Angeles County Superior Court, Cohen testified that Lynch had been so outraged by the suit that she started calling him twenty, thirty times a day and inundating him with e-mails, some directly threatening, eventually ignoring a restraining order.,Cohen has never managed to collect the awarded damages, and, because the situation is still a matter of litigation, he does not like to talk about it.,For proof, take a look at a YouTube clip called "Why It’s Good to Be Leonard Cohen": a filmmaker follows Cohen backstage as a beautiful German-accented actress tries to coax him, in front of a full dressing room, to "go somewhere" with her as he wryly rebuffs her.,So it was more than a little surprising when Faggen and I returned to the house one afternoon thinking that we were on time and were informed, in the sternest terms imaginable, that we were not.  In fact, Cohen, wearing a dark suit and a fedora, settled into his medical chair and gave us the most forbidding talking-to I have experienced since grade school.  But there had apparently been a misunderstanding about the time of our visit, and a text to him and his assistant seemed to have gone unseen.,There was no way I could transpose the positions that I knew." Instead, Cohen tuned the strings on his guitar down two whole steps, so, for instance, the low E was now a low C.,It was a first-class operation: a private plane, where Cohen could write and sleep; good hotels, where he could read and compose on a keyboard; a car to take him to the hotel the minute he stepped off the stage.  Some of the most memorable musical performances Cohen had ever seen were by Alberta Hunter, the blues singer, who had a long residency in the late seventies at the Cookery, in the Village.,"You could feel it in the dressing room as you moved closer to the concert, you could feel the sense of commitment, tangible in the room." This time, there was no warmup with Château Latour.,Time and again, he would enact the song as well as sing it, taking one knee in gratitude to the object of affection, taking both knees to emphasize his devotion, to the audience, to the musicians, to the song.,At one point, he flipped on the "Greek" mode, and suddenly he was singing a Greek fisherman’s song, as if we had suddenly transported ourselves back in time, to Dousko’s Taverna, "in the deep night of fixed and falling stars" on the island of Hydra. Cohen’s hand has been bothering him, so he plays the guitar less than he did—"I’ve lost my ‘chop’ "—but he was eager to show me his synthesizer.,That was beyond understanding and language: "I don’t ask for information that I probably wouldn’t be able to process even if it were granted to me." Persistence, living to the last, loose ends, work—that was the thing.,Hineni is Hebrew for "Here I am," Abraham’s answer to the summons of God to sacrifice his son Isaac; the song is clearly an announcement of readiness, a man at the end preparing for his service and devotion.,At this stage of the game, I hear it saying, ‘Leonard, just get on with the things you have to do.’ It’s very compassionate at this stage.